@document.meta
title: Waybar Configuration (Sway)
description: Status bar configuration for the Sway window manager
authors: Darrion Burgess
categories: Desktop Environment Sway
tangle: ../../../dot_config/waybar/config.jsonc
created: 2026-02-22
updated: 2026-02-22
version: 1.0.0
@end

{https://github.com/Alexays/Waybar}[Waybar] is our status bar, shared between sway and hyprland but configured here for sway. The key difference from hyprland is the workspace/window modules: sway has its own native IPC protocol and waybar ships first-class modules for it.

* Module Layout

  Waybar is divided into left, center, and right module groups. We keep this minimal and close to out-of-the-box.

  #tangle
  @code json
  {
  	"height": 30,
  	"spacing": 4,
  	"modules-left": [
  		"sway/workspaces",
  		"sway/mode"
  	],
  	"modules-center": [
  		"sway/window"
  	],
  	"modules-right": [
  		"idle_inhibitor",
  		"cpu",
  		"memory",
  		"temperature",
  		"wireplumber",
  		"bluetooth",
  		"clock",
  		"tray",
  		"custom/power"
  	],
  @end

  - Left: sway workspaces (shows numbered workspaces with active indicator) and mode (shows the current sway binding mode, e.g. "resize")
  - Center: the focused window title
  - Right: system info and controls. MPD and keyboard-state are excluded — too opinionated for a baseline config.

* Sway-Specific Module Configuration

  The sway modules need minimal configuration — waybar handles workspace numbering and active state automatically via sway IPC.
  #tangle
  @code json
  	"sway/workspaces": {
  		"disable-scroll": true,
  		"all-outputs": true,
  		"format": "{name}"
  	},
  	"sway/mode": {
  		"format": "<span style=\"italic\">{}</span>"
  	},
  	"sway/window": {
  		"max-length": 50
  	},
  @end

  - `disable-scroll` prevents accidentally changing workspaces by scrolling over the bar
  - `all-outputs` shows all workspaces regardless of which monitor waybar is on (single-monitor setup)
  - The mode module italicises the mode name (e.g. "resize") to distinguish it visually

* Idle Inhibitor
  #tangle
  @code json
  	"idle_inhibitor": {
  		"format": "{icon}",
  		"format-icons": {
  			"activated": "",
  			"deactivated": ""
  		}
  	},
  @end

  Lets you temporarily prevent the screen from locking — useful during presentations or long reads. Works with swayidle.

* System Info Modules

  Standard system information — CPU, memory, temperature. These are WM-agnostic.
  #tangle
  @code json
  	"cpu": {
  		"format": "{usage}% ",
  		"tooltip": false
  	},
  	"memory": {
  		"format": "{}% "
  	},
  	"temperature": {
  		"critical-threshold": 80,
  		"format": "{temperatureC}°C {icon}",
  		"format-icons": ["", "", ""]
  	},
  @end

* Audio and Bluetooth
  #tangle
  @code json
  	"wireplumber": {
  		"on-click": "helvum"
  	},
  	"bluetooth": {
  		"on-click": "/usr/bin/blueman-manager"
  	},
  @end

  - wireplumber shows volume; clicking opens helvum for audio routing
  - bluetooth shows status; clicking opens blueman

* Clock
  #tangle
  @code json
  	"clock": {
  		"format": "{:%I:%M %p}",
  		"tooltip-format": "<big>{:%Y %B}</big>\n<tt><small>{calendar}</small></tt>",
  		"format-alt": "{:%Y-%m-%d}"
  	},
  @end

  12-hour format by default. Click to toggle to ISO date.

* Tray and Power Menu
  #tangle
  @code json
  	"tray": {
  		"spacing": 10
  	},
  	"custom/power": {
  		"format": "⏻ ",
  		"tooltip": false,
  		"menu": "on-click",
  		"menu-file": "$HOME/.config/waybar/power_menu.xml",
  		"menu-actions": {
  			"shutdown": "shutdown",
  			"reboot": "reboot",
  			"suspend": "systemctl suspend",
  			"hibernate": "systemctl hibernate"
  		}
  	}
  }
  @end

  The power menu uses the existing `power_menu.xml` which is already deployed. The closing `}` here closes the top-level waybar config object.
