@document.meta
title: Paru Bootstrap
description: Hook script that installs the paru AUR helper before chezmoi reads source state
authors: primary_desktop
categories: Package Management Bootstrap
tangle: ../../bootstrap-paru.sh
created: 2026-02-25
updated: 2026-02-25
version: 0.1.0
@end

`paru` is the primary AUR helper for this configuration. The problem: paru lives in the AUR,
so it cannot be installed via pacman, and using `run_onchange_` scripts to install it would
fail because those scripts are templates — they need paru to already exist before they can
run. Classic chicken-and-egg.

The solution is chezmoi's `hooks.read-source-state.pre` hook. This hook runs *after*
`chezmoi init` clones the repository but *before* chezmoi reads the source state and
evaluates templates. This is the exact right moment to install paru: the repo is available,
but no template evaluation has happened yet.

The hook script is registered in `.chezmoi.toml.tmpl` (see `chezmoi/config.norg`).

* Detection Strategy

  We detect Arch-based systems using `/etc/arch-release`. This file exists on:
  - Arch Linux
  - Manjaro
  - EndeavourOS
  - And most other Arch derivatives

  It is a 1-byte marker file — we only test for its existence, not its contents.

  We do NOT use `uname -s` here because that only distinguishes between Linux, macOS,
  and Windows — it does not identify the distribution.

* Idempotency

  The script exits immediately if `paru` or `yay` is already in `$PATH`. This ensures:
  - Re-running `chezmoi init` on an already-configured machine does nothing
  - The hook is safe to run multiple times

* Build Requirements

  Building paru from AUR requires `base-devel` and `git` to be present. These are expected
  to exist on any Arch installation. `makepkg` must NOT be run as root — this script is
  designed to run as the logged-in user who has sudo access.

* The Script

  #tangle
  @code sh
  #!/bin/sh

  # Only runs on Arch-based systems
  [ -f /etc/arch-release ] || exit 0

  # Exit if an AUR helper is already installed
  type paru >/dev/null 2>&1 && exit 0
  type yay >/dev/null 2>&1 && exit 0

  # Build and install paru from AUR
  # Requires: base-devel, git (standard on any Arch base install)
  # Must NOT run as root — makepkg refuses to build as root
  TMPDIR=$(mktemp -d)
  cd "$TMPDIR" || exit 1
  git clone https://aur.archlinux.org/paru.git
  cd paru || exit 1
  makepkg -si --noconfirm
  cd / && rm -rf "$TMPDIR"
  @end
