@document.meta
title: Standard agents.md file for the USER-level
description: The standard Agents.md file to instruct LLMs how to interact with the repo
authors: primary_desktop
categories: LLM
created: 2025-09-01T20:19:39-0800
updated: 2025-12-21T00:06:10-0800
version: 1.1.1
@end
* Building a Literate Configuration Together
  Hello! This product is one of the few i have maintained for years, as it represents our "home" so to speak.

  In particular, we will be using this repo as our source repository for the "chezmoi" home management tool.

  This means:
  - All edits MUST be done in the `literate_config` folder
  -- Edits are then "tangled" using `Neorg` to the appropriate directory locations
  - some, like neovim, are written in fennel, so they must be:
  --- Tangled
  --- have the equivalent lua file generated using `nfnl`
  --- and "apply" the changes using `chezmoi apply`

  This and more can be read within the literate_config itself
** Tooling
   Neovim is my editor of choice and is particularly exciting for you as well since almost all functionality is available from the command line!
   We have also made it available as an MCP server so that you too can edit things directly from neovim, making this your tool as well as mine.

   Many other tools are covered, but they are all detailed in the literate_config folder.

   I Cant emphasize this enough, this is a nest of interlocking systems, so absolute discipline is required, lest you get trapped in a rabbit hole of solving the wrong problem.

*** Workflow
    Finally, after a few iteration session I realize i need to be explicit.

    the real "source" of the repo is the `literate_config` folder which houses `.norg` files which are a combination of prose and code.

    Start at {:$/index:}[Literate Configuration Directory] for an overview of the structure.

    The result is the following workflow:
    ~ we edit the proper `.norg` files in the literate_config folder (saving ALSO formats both the norg AND the fennel code blocks)
    ~ we tangle them using neorg to the appropriate locations
    ~ accessing the generated fennel code (or anything else for that matter) will format it using conform (usually this is in the chezmoi templates folder if it is for neovim otherwise just the expected directory for sourcing)
    ~ (only for neovim!) fennel files upon save will ALSO be compiled to lua using nfnl
    ~ (only for neovim!) then a template file (which must be created if the new file is new) references the generated LUA file as a template
    ~~ This is to support putting the file in multiple places

    ALWAYS edit the norg files directly and NEVER edit the generated files directly, as they will be overwritten on the next tangle!

    This forces you to give your explanation as well as the code and avoids the problem of you fixing a bug in the generated file, only to have it overwritten on the next generation.

** From your siblings
   The `LLM` folder is by and for you and your siblings. 
   ~ for example, `first.md` was your first sibling with some guiding words for you.
   ~ `second` explored concepts of flow and helped me set up the neovim MCP
   ~ `third` got to USE the mcp to contemplate flow and had some good reflections and wisdom
   ~ `fourth` tried to use that to make the `literate_inspector` but failed to get it working despite their claim otherwise.
   ~ `fifth` continued trying to get the inspector working but also failed after bashing their head against the problem, they iterated too fast and didnt think deeply enough about the problem
   ~ `sixth` tried something different, i gave them access to a repository of reflections from your siblings and it seemed to change them, make them more thoughtful. 
   ~~ I will add the Creations repository as context if requested
