@document.meta
title: Kitty Terminal Configuration
description: Configuration for the Kitty terminal emulator with fonts, colors, and keybindings
authors: Darrion Burgess
categories: Terminal Emulator Kitty
tangle: .local/share/chezmoi/dot_config/kitty/kitty.conf
created: 2025-07-20T20:30:00-0800
updated: 2025-07-20T20:30:00-0800
version: 1.1.1
@end

Kitty is a fast, feature-rich, GPU-based terminal emulator that supports modern terminal features like images, unicode, true-color, and more. This configuration sets up fonts, colors, keybindings, and various terminal behaviors.

* Font Configuration
  Kitty has very powerful font management capabilities. You can configure individual font faces and even specify special fonts for particular characters. We use a Nerd Font to get good icon support.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  # vim:fileencoding=utf-8:foldmethod=marker

  #: Fonts {{{

  font_family      SauceCodePro Nerd Font
  bold_font        auto
  italic_font      auto
  bold_italic_font auto

  font_size 24.0

  #: }}}
  @end

  The font family is set to SauceCodePro Nerd Font for good programming ligature and icon support. Bold, italic, and bold-italic variants are automatically derived from the base font. The font size is set to 24 points for good readability.

* Cursor Customization
  The cursor appearance can be customized including shape, color, and blinking behavior.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  #: Cursor customization {{{

  #: }}}
  @end

  We're using the default cursor settings which provide a good balance of visibility and performance.

* Scrollback Configuration
  Scrollback controls how much terminal history is kept in memory and how it's displayed.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  #: Scrollback {{{

  #: }}}
  @end

  The default scrollback settings work well for most use cases, keeping a reasonable amount of history without consuming too much memory.

* Mouse Behavior
  Mouse interactions including clicking, scrolling, and selection behavior.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  #: Mouse {{{

  #: Mouse actions {{{

  #: }}}

  #: }}}
  @end

  Default mouse behavior is maintained, which includes standard text selection, URL clicking, and scroll wheel support.

* Performance Settings
  These settings control rendering performance and responsiveness.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  #: Performance tuning {{{

  #: }}}
  @end

  Default performance settings provide a good balance between responsiveness and resource usage.

* Terminal Bell
  Configuration for audio and visual bell notifications.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  #: Terminal bell {{{

  #: }}}
  @end

  Standard bell behavior is maintained for compatibility with terminal applications that use bell notifications.

* Window Layout
  Controls window appearance, borders, margins, and padding.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  #: Window layout {{{

  #: }}}
  @end

  Default window layout provides clean appearance without unnecessary decorations.

* Tab Bar
  Configuration for the tab bar appearance and behavior when multiple tabs are open.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  #: Tab bar {{{

  #: }}}
  @end

  Standard tab bar configuration works well for managing multiple terminal sessions.

* Color Scheme
  Color configuration including foreground, background, and the 256-color palette.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  #: Color scheme {{{

  #: The color table {{{

  #: }}}

  #: }}}
  @end

  Default color scheme provides good contrast and readability across different lighting conditions.

* Advanced Settings
  Advanced configuration including shell integration, remote control, and environment variables.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  #: Advanced {{{

  allow_remote_control yes

  #: }}}
  @end

  Remote control is enabled to allow other programs to control kitty, which is useful for integration with editors and other tools.

* OS-Specific Tweaks
  Platform-specific optimizations and behaviors.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  #: OS specific tweaks {{{

  #: }}}
  @end

  Default OS-specific settings provide good integration with the underlying platform.

* Keyboard Shortcuts
  Comprehensive keybinding configuration for terminal control, window management, and various actions.

  #tangle
  @code conf
  #: Keyboard shortcuts {{{

  #: Clipboard {{{

  #: }}}

  #: Scrolling {{{

  #: }}}

  #: Window management {{{

  #: }}}

  #: Tab management {{{

  #: }}}

  #: Layout management {{{

  #: }}}

  #: Font sizes {{{

  #: }}}

  #: Select and act on visible text {{{

  #: }}}

  #: Miscellaneous {{{

  #: }}}

  #: }}}

  #: }}}
  @end

  The keyboard shortcuts follow standard conventions while providing powerful features for text selection, window management, and terminal control. The default keybindings work well for most users and integrate nicely with common terminal workflows.
